Move Binder tutorial into the Comms Guide (#1850)
alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way: book/website/communication/binder/zero-to-binder.md

See [Binder's `postBuild` example](https://mybinder.readthedocs.io/en/latest/using/config_files.html#postbuild-run-code-after-installing-the-environment) for more uses of the `postBuild` script.

```{note}
New images are only built when Binder sees a new commit, not every time you click the Binder link.
Therefore, the data is only downloaded once when the Docker image is built, not every time the Binder is launched.
```

### Large public files

It is not practical to place large files in your GitHub repo or include them directly in the image that Binder builds.
The best option for large files is to use a library specific to the data format to stream the data as you're using it or to download it on demand as part of your code.

For security reasons, the outgoing traffic of your Binder is restricted to HTTP or GitHub connections only. You will not be able to use FTP sites to fetch data on mybinder.org.

### Private files

There is no way to access files which are not public from mybinder.org.
You should consider all information in your Binder as public, meaning that:

> - there should be no passwords, tokens, keys etc in your GitHub repo;

Reviewer: This etc. is causing the "no bad latin" check to fail

Author: Thank you - this is still a draft PR and I haven't tweaked all the text yet 😊

(z2b)=
# Zero-to-Binder

In this chapter, we will create a Binder project from a repository we create on GitHub and launch in on mybinder.org.
Sections where you are expected to complete a task are denoted by three traffic light 🚦 emojis.

> Some steps have the option of Python, Julia or R languages - click on the tab of the language you would like to use.

Author: ```suggestion
Some steps give you the option of Python, Julia or R - click on the tab of your preferred language.
```

```

```{attention}
Binder can take a long time to load, but this doesn't necessarily mean that your Binder will fail to launch.
You can always refresh the window if you see the "... is taking longer to load, hang tight!" message.
```

```{admonition} If you are using R...
If you are following the R path, we have included some alternative steps using the [`holepunch` package](https://github.com/karthik/holepunch) which will build your environment using a [rocker base image](https://github.com/rocker-org/rocker) and should, ultimately, be faster to build and launch.
```

(z2b-reqs)=
## Requirements

You will need:

- **Some code and some data.**
  The code should take less than **10 minutes to run**, and the data should be less than **10 MB**.
  This might mean that you just pick one script from a bigger project, or bring a subset of your data.
  Note that it's really important that the code and data can be made **public** because we'll be using the public binder instance.
- **A GitHub account.**
  Please sign up for one if you don't already have one: <https://github.com/join>

(z2b-step-1)=
## 1. Creating a repo to Binderize

🚦🚦🚦

````{tabbed} Python

> 1) Create a new repo on GitHub called "my-first-binder".

Author: ```suggestion
1) Create a new repo on GitHub called "my-first-binder"
```

   - Make sure the repository is **public**, _not private_!

>    - Don't forget to initialise with a README!

Author: ```suggestion
   - Don't forget to initialise the repo with a README!
```

2) Create a file called `hello.py` via the web interface with `print("Hello from Binder!")` on the first line and commit to the `main` branch
````

````{tabbed} Julia

> 1) Create a new repo on GitHub called "my-first-binder".

Author: ```suggestion
1) Create a new repo on GitHub called "my-first-binder"
```

   - Make sure the repository is **public**, _not private_!

>    - Don't forget to initialise with a README!

Author: ```suggestion
   - Don't forget to initialise the repo with a README!
```

2) Create a file called `hello.jl` via the web interface with `println("Hello from Binder!")` on the first line and commit to the `main` branch

> 3) Create a file called `Project.toml` (:rotating_light: the capitalisation is important!) with the following content and commit it to `main`.

Author: ```suggestion
3) Create a file called `Project.toml` (WARNING: the capitalisation is important!) with the following content and commit it to `main`.
```

   This will install Julia into the Binder environment.

   ```julia
   [compat]
   julia = "1.3"
   ```
````

````{tabbed} R

> 1) Create a new repo on GitHub called "my-first-binder".

Author: ```suggestion
1) Create a new repo on GitHub called "my-first-binder"
```

   - Make sure the repository is **public**, _not private_!

>    - Don't forget to initialise with a README!

Author: ```suggestion
   - Don't forget to initialise the repo with a README!
```

> 2) Create a file called `hello.R` via the web interface with `print("Hello from Binder!")` on the first line and commit to the `main` branch.

Author: ```suggestion
2) Create a file called `hello.R` via the web interface with `print("Hello from Binder!")` on the first line and commit to the `main` branch
```

3) Create a file called `runtime.txt` with `r-2022-01-01` on the first line.
   This date represents the snapshot of [CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/) hosted on the [RStudio Package Manager](https://packagemanager.rstudio.com) we will use.
   Commit this file to the `main` branch.

   ```{note}

>    In R you can use `holepunch::write_runtime()` to create a `runtime.txt` in the `.binder/` directory, configured with today's date.

Author: ```suggestion
   In R you can use `holepunch::write_runtime()` to create a `runtime.txt` in the `.binder/` directory; it will be configured with today's date.
```

   ```
````

(z2b-public-repo)=

> ### Why did the repo have to be public?

Author: ```suggestion
### Why does the repo have to be public?
```

mybinder.org cannot access private repositories as this would require a secret token.
The Binder team choose not to take on the responsibility of handling secret tokens as mybinder.org is a public service and proof of technological concept.
If accessing private repositories is a feature you/your team need, we advise that you look into building your own [BinderHub](https://binderhub.readthedocs.io).

(z2b-step-2)=
## 2. Launch your first repo!

🚦🚦🚦

1) Go to **<https://mybinder.org>**
2) Type the URL of your repo into the "GitHub repo or URL" box.
   It should look like this:
   > **https://github.com/YOUR-USERNAME/my-first-binder**
3) As you type, the webpage generates a link in the "Copy the URL below..." box
   It should look like this:
   > **https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/YOUR-USERNAME/my-first-binder/HEAD**

> 4) Copy it, open a new browser tab and visit that URL.
>    - You will see a "spinner" as Binder launches the repo.

Author: ```suggestion
4) Copy it, open a new browser tab and visit that URL
   - You will see a "spinner" as Binder launches the repo
```

If everything ran smoothly, you'll see a JupyterLab interface.

(z2b-background-1)=
### What's happening in the background? - Part 1

While you wait, BinderHub (the backend of Binder) is:

- Fetching your repo from GitHub
- Analysing the contents
- Building a Docker image based on your repo
- Launching that Docker image in the cloud
- Connecting you to it via your browser

(z2b-step-3)=
## 3. Run the script

🚦🚦🚦

````{tabbed} Python
1. From the launch panel, select "Terminal"
2. In the new terminal window, type `python hello.py` and press return
````

````{tabbed} Julia
1. From the launch panel, select "Terminal"
2. In the new terminal window, type `julia hello.jl` and press return
````

````{tabbed} R
1. From the launch panel, select "Terminal"
2. In the new terminal window, type `Rscript -e 'source("hello.R")'` and then press return
````

`Hello from Binder!` should be printed to the terminal.

(z2b-step-4)=
## 4. Pinning Dependencies

It was easy to get started, but our environment is barebones - let's add a **dependency**!

🚦🚦🚦

````{tabbed} Python

> 1) In your repo, create a file called `requirements.txt`
> 2) Add a line that says: `numpy==1.14.5`
> 3) Check for typos! Then commit to the `main` branch.
> 4) Visit **https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/YOUR-USERNAME/my-first-binder/HEAD** again in a new tab

Author: ```suggestion
1) In your repo, create a file called `requirements.txt`
2) Add a line that says: `numpy==1.14.5`
3) Check for typos! Then commit to the `main` branch
4) Visit **https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/YOUR-USERNAME/my-first-binder/HEAD** again in a new tab
```

````

````{tabbed} Julia
1) In your repo, edit the `Project.toml` file
2) Add a new block that says:

   ```julia
   [deps]
   CSV = "336ed68f-0bac-5ca0-87d4-7b16caf5d00b"
   ```

3) Check for typos! Then commit to `main`.
4) Visit **https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/YOUR-USERNAME/my-first-binder/HEAD** again in a new tab
````

````{tabbed} R

> 1) In your repo, create a file called `install.R`
> 2) Add a line that says: `install.packages("readr")`
> 3) Check for typos! Then commit to the `main` branch.
> 4) Visit **https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/YOUR-USERNAME/my-first-binder/HEAD** again in a new tab

Author: ```suggestion
1) In your repo, create a file called `install.R`
2) Add a line that says: `install.packages("readr")`
3) Check for typos! Then commit to the `main` branch
4) Visit **https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/YOUR-USERNAME/my-first-binder/HEAD** again in a new tab
```

```{note}

> In R you can create an `install.R` file and automatically add the code to install all dependencies in your project using `holepunch::write_install()`.

Author: ```suggestion
If using `holepunch`, you can create an `install.R` file and automatically add the code to install all dependencies in your project using `holepunch::write_install()`.
```

Finally, you could not provide a version number at all (just the name of the library/package) and Binder will install the latest version of that package.
````

````{tabbed} Julia
In the above example, we copied a hash into our `Project.toml` file which is related to the version of the package we'd like to install.
For a full dependency graph, we would also need to include a `Manifest.toml` file which would document dependencies of dependencies.
Between these two files, we are able to instantiate an exact replication of a Julia environment.

Of course we can imagine that, as the environment grows and the inter-dependencies become more complex, it would become very taxing to write these files by hand!
The truth is that you'd never do it manually, the built-in package manager `Pkg` can [generate them automatically](https://julialang.github.io/Pkg.jl/v1/environments/).
````

````{tabbed} R
In the above example, we specified that we want to use R in our project by including a date in `runtime.txt`.
The date tells Binder which CRAN snapshot to source R and packages from.

> These snapshots are sourced from the [RStudio Package Manager](https://packagemanager.rstudio.com).
> In the above example, the MRAN snapshot dated `r-2022-01-01` is used and the version of R and `readr` available at that date and installed.

Author: ```suggestion
These snapshots are sourced from the [RStudio Package Manager](https://packagemanager.rstudio.com) (RSPM).
In the above example, the RSPM snapshot dated `r-2022-01-01` is used and the version of R and `readr` available at that date and installed.
```

> For the workflow to work correctly, please ensure you do not supply a date earlier than this example date.

Author: ```suggestion
For the example workflow to work correctly, please ensure you do not supply a date earlier than this example date.
```

````

(z2b-step-5)=
## 5. Check the Environment

🚦🚦🚦

````{tabbed} Python
1) From the launch panel, select "Python 3" from the Notebook section to open a new notebook
2) Type the following into a new cell:

   ```python
   import numpy
   print(numpy.__version__)
   numpy.random.randn()
   ```

   ```{attention}
   Note the two underscores either side of `version`!
   ```

3) Run the cell to see the version number and a random number printed out
   - Press either SHIFT+RETURN or the "Run" button in the Menu bar
````

````{tabbed} Julia
1) From the launch panel, select "Julia" from the Notebook section to open a new Julia notebook
2) Type the following into a new cell:

   ```julia
   using Pkg
   Pkg.status()
   ```

3) Run the cell to see the version number printed out
   - Press either SHIFT+RETURN or the "Run" button in the Menu bar
````

````{tabbed} R
1) From the launch panel, select "R" from the Notebook section to open a new R notebook
2) Type the following into a new cell:

   ```r
   library(readr)
   packageVersion("readr")
   read_csv(system.file("extdata/mtcars.csv", package = "readr"))
   ```

> 3) Run the cell.
>     - Press either SHIFT+RETURN or the "Run" button in the Menu bar.
>     You should see the following output:
>       - the version number of the installed version of `readr`.
>       - a tibble of the contents of the `mtcars.csv` which is a csv file included in package `readr`.

Author: ```suggestion
3) Run the cell
    - Press either SHIFT+RETURN or the "Run" button in the Menu bar
    You should see the following output:
      - the version number of the installed version of `readr`
      - a tibble of the contents of the `mtcars.csv` which is a csv file included in package `readr`
```

````

```{attention}
If you save this notebook, it **will not** be saved to the GitHub repo.
Pushing changes back to the GitHub repo through the container is not possible with Binder.
**Any changes you have made to files inside the Binder will be lost once you close the browser window.**
```

(z2b-step-6)=
## 6. Sharing your Work

Binder is all about sharing your work easily and there are two ways to do it:

- Share the **https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/YOUR-USERNAME/my-first-binder/HEAD** URL directly
- Visit **<https://mybinder.org>**, type in the URL of your repo and copy the Markdown or ReStructured Text snippet into your `README.md` file.

>   This snippet will render a badge that people can click, which looks like this: ![Binder](https://mybinder.org/badge_logo.svg)

Reviewer 2: Oh, scratch that, there’s a button for both RStudio and Shiny! Niceeee!

This is ideal for files up to **10MB**.

(z2b-medium-files)=
### Medium public files

To access medium files **from a few 10s MB up to a few hundred MB**, you can add a file called `postBuild` to your repo.
A `postBuild` file is a shell script that is executed as part of the image construction and is only executed once when a new image is built, not every time the Binder is launched.

See [Binder's `postBuild` example](https://mybinder.readthedocs.io/en/latest/using/config_files.html#postbuild-run-code-after-installing-the-environment) for more uses of the `postBuild` script.

```{note}
New images are only built when Binder sees a new commit, not every time you click the Binder link.
Therefore, the data is only downloaded once when the Docker image is built, not every time the Binder is launched.
```

(z2b-large-files)=
### Large public files

It is not practical to place large files in your GitHub repo or include them directly in the image that Binder builds.
The best option for large files is to use a library specific to the data format to stream the data as you're using it or to download it on demand as part of your code.

> For security reasons, the outgoing traffic of your Binder is restricted to HTTP or GitHub connections only. You will not be able to use FTP sites to fetch data on mybinder.org.

Author: ```suggestion
For security reasons, the outgoing traffic of your Binder is restricted to HTTP/S or GitHub connections only. You will not be able to use FTP sites to fetch data on mybinder.org.
```

Once the Binder has launched, you should see a new file has appeared that was not part of your repo when you clicked the badge.

Now visualise the data by creating a new notebook (selecting "Julia" from the Notebook section) and run the following code in a cell.

```julia
using DataFrames
using CSV
using Plots

data = CSV.read("gapminder.csv", DataFrame)

# Extract the row corresponding to Australia
aus_gdp = data[data[:, :country] .== "Australia", :]
aus_gdp = Matrix(aus_gdp[:,2:end])[:]  # as vector

# Extract the years as Ints from the column names
years = [x[end-3:end] for x in names(data)[2:end]]
years = parse.(Int, years)

# Plot
plot(years, aus_gdp)
```
````

````{tabbed} R
1) Go to your GitHub repo and create a file called `postBuild`
2) In `postBuild`, add a single line reading: `wget -q -O gapminder.csv http://bit.ly/2uh4s3g`
   - `wget` is a program which retrieves content from web servers.
     This line extracts the content from the bitly URL and saves it to the filename denoted by the `-O` flag (capital "O", not zero), in this case `gapminder.csv`.
     The `-q` flag tells `wget` to do this quietly, meaning it won't print anything to the console.

> 3) Update your `install.R` file to install two additional dependencies, `"tidyr"` and `"ggplot2"`. To do so, supply a character vector of the required packages to `install.packages()` instead of a single character string. The installation command should now look like this:

Reviewer 2: I would also add `dplyr` to the mix and make the code below more `tidyverse`-like using the `filter` function.

Author: So my vision for the multi-language workshop, is that there should be as few differences as possible between the tracks except what you feed to binder. I'm also not teaching them anything about coding best practices (or indeed, git best practices! All the commits to main!). So I kinda don't really know what side of the fence I come down on on this point.

   ```r
   install.packages(c("readr", "tidyr", "ggplot2"))
   ```

    - These packages aren't necessary to download the data but we will use them to read the CSV file, process it and make a plot
4) Click the binder badge in your README to launch your Binder

Once the Binder has launched, you should see a new file has appeared that was not part of your repo when you clicked the badge.

Now visualise the data by creating a new notebook (selecting "R" from the Notebook section) and running the following code in a cell.

```r
library(readr)
library(tidyr)
library(ggplot2)

data <- read_csv("gapminder.csv") %>%
    pivot_longer(-country,
                 names_to = "year",
                 values_to = "gdpPercap",
                 names_prefix = "gdpPercap_",
                 names_transform = list(year = as.integer))

data[data$country == "Australia", ] %>%
    ggplot(aes(x = year, y = gdpPercap)) +

>     geom_line()

Reviewer 2: ```R
data %>%
    filter(country == "Australia") %>%
    ggplot(aes(x = year, y = gdpPercap)) +
    geom_line()
```

Author: See https://github.com/alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way/pull/1850#discussion_r798491849

```
````

(z2b-beyond-notebooks)=

> ## Changing the Interface

Reviewer 2: Should we add that if you’re in the default instances of newly created Binders, then it’ll open up JLab, and that has buttons to launch Rstudio, for example?

> Throughout this tutorial, we have been using the JupyterLab interface.
> However, this is not the only interface available on mybinder.org, the Classic Notebook view and RStudio are available too.
> (An R environment needs to be installed for RStudio to be available.)
> 
> You can access the different interfaces in different ways.

Author: ```suggestion
Throughout this tutorial, we have been using the JupyterLab interface.
This is the default interface for newly created Binder instances.
However, this is not the only interface available on mybinder.org, the Classic Notebook view and RStudio are available too.
(An R environment needs to be installed for RStudio to be available.)

You can access the different interfaces in different ways.
The easiest way is to use the buttons in the JupyterLab Launcher, but you can provide URL parameters to directly open a specific interface (or file!) when the Binder instance launches.
We'll now cover three ways you can manipulate your Binder URL to navigate between interfaces.
```

(z2b)=
# Zero-to-Binder

> In this chapter, we will create a Binder project from a repository we create on GitHub and launch in on mybinder.org.

Author: ```suggestion
In this chapter, we will create a Binder project from scratch: we will first make a repository on GitHub and then launch in on mybinder.org.
```

Of course we can imagine that, as the environment grows and the inter-dependencies become more complex, it would become very taxing to write these files by hand!
The truth is that you'd never do it manually, the built-in package manager `Pkg` can [generate them automatically](https://julialang.github.io/Pkg.jl/v1/environments/).
````

````{tabbed} R
In the above example, we specified that we want to use R in our project by including a date in `runtime.txt`.
The date tells Binder which MRAN snapshot to source R and packages from.
[MRAN](https://mran.microsoft.com/) hosts a "CRAN Time Machine" of daily snapshots of the CRAN R packages and R releases as far back as Sept. 17, 2014.
In the above example, the MRAN snapshot dated `r-2020-05-26` is used and the version of R and `readr` available at that date and installed.
For the workflow to work correctly, please ensure you do not supply a date earlier than this example date.

This provides some rudimentary package versioning for R users but is not as robust as pinning versions in a `requirements.txt` in Python.
For more robust and specific version pinning in R, have a look at the [`renv`](https://rstudio.github.io/renv/) package.

> ````

Author: Hey @yuvipanda! Can you give some guidance on how to update this section given Binder's move to RSPM?

Reviewer 3: Thanks for the ping, @sgibson91!

Once https://github.com/jupyterhub/repo2docker/pull/1104 lands, the only difference is that the CRAN snapshots will be maintained by RStudio and come from https://packagemanager.rstudio.com/client/#/ instead of from Microsoft / MRAN. This is *much* faster and gives us binary builds. 

Only additional point is that for some complex R packages, you will need to install some apt packages to get them to work. For example, [rstan](https://packagemanager.rstudio.com/client/#/repos/1/packages/rstan) needs `libv8-dev` to be specified in `apt.txt`. packagemanager.rstudio.com lists them explicitly in their package page, and it's not needed for most common packages - so maybe not useful for this guide? Just wanted to note it as a point of difference from current setup.

Hope this was helpful!

Author: Addressed in [`9e612d1`](https://github.com/alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way/pull/1850/commits/9e612d1edf2260de36bea1f6d7773f554232e53c)

````{tabbed} R
In the above example, we specified that we want to use R in our project by including a date in `runtime.txt`.
The date tells Binder which CRAN snapshot to source R and packages from.

> These snapshots are sourced from the [RStudio Package Manager](https://www.rstudio.com/products/package-manager/).

Reviewer 3: packagemanager.rstudio.com is a better URL I think, as this link mostly talks about the self-hosted version

> In the above example, the MRAN snapshot dated `r-2021-12-20` is used and the version of R and `readr` available at that date and installed.

Reviewer 3: The packagemanager.rstudio.com change currently will only be effective for dates frozen after 2022-01-01.
